WI #643: Specification Change Guidelines (#684)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/spec-change-guidelines.md

# FOCUS Specification Change Guidelines

The FOCUS specification is designed to be updated over time to support new use cases and adapt to industry changes. Communication, specificity, and impact are considered as changes are made. While data using the FOCUS specification facilitates a wide range of analysis, the specification and the change process are scoped to the <official use cases> and the schema described in the FOCUS specification and not to all possible data analyses. While example queries may be provided, specific queries are not considered expressly supported content. 

## Versions

The FOCUS specification is released periodically. For each release a version number is assigned. Version numbers at this time are not strictly representative of compatibility. The version number is used to identify the release and to provide a reference point for changes. 

## Version Changelog

> A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of the focus specification. The changelog for each version identifies the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of the FOCUS specification. The changelog for each version identifies the following:
```

* The version number
* Impact Classification
* Change Type Classification 
* Designation of deprecation of a feature or column
* Designation of the addition of a new feature or column
* Description of the change
* Examples of the change, if needed

## Change Process

### Addition of a New Feature or Column

When a new feature or column is introduced to the FOCUS specification, depending on the circumstances of the change, its support may be initially optional. This allows providers that support it to adopt the new feature or column without restricting other adopters from using newer versions of the specification. 

* The feature or item addition is proposed, and the specification is modified. 
* Change log indicates that the new feature/column has been added.

>     * Example: "Column 1 has been added in version 2.0."

Reviewer 2: What do these rows intend to indicate?

  * If the removal version has already been determined, the change log MUST state, "This column will be removed in version 2.1."
* Prior to removal, the FOCUS specification MUST be updated to include the version that will remove the deprecated column/metadata

## Change Type Classification

Changes to the FOCUS specification are classified into one of the following types:

### Addition

The addition of a new feature or column to the FOCUS specification.

### Deprecation

A feature or column from the FOCUS specification is moving to deprecated status, discouraging use and indicating that the same will be removed in a future version 

### Removal

The removal of a feature or column from the FOCUS specification.

### Improvement

Modification to improve or refine a feature or column in the FOCUS specification that was not considered broken. 

### Bug Fix

Modification to correct an error in the FOCUS specification, that was considered broken.

### Editorial

Modification to correct a spelling, grammar, or formatting error in the FOCUS specification that does not impact the intended logic of the specification contents. 

## Change Impact Classification

> The FOCUS specification is designed to be updated overtime to increase it use and to adapt to changes in the industry over time.  In order to provide insight into the impact of the change, changes are classified into one of the following categories Change Impact categories:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The FOCUS specification is designed to be updated overtime to increase use and to adapt to changes in the industry over time.  In order to provide insight into the impact of the change, changes are classified into one of the following categories Change Impact categories:
```

 ### Compatible Change

> Any change in the spec that does not require modification by the consumer to continue using the spec for published use cases. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any change in the specification that does not require modification by the consumer to continue using the specification for published use cases. 
```
```suggestion
Any change in the specification that does not require modification by the consumer to continue using the specification for published use cases. 
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest we use consistent naming, earlier we use specification then change to spec, might be good to stay consistent.

Examples: 
  - Adding a new column for a new use case or 
  - Adding a new category for an existing that does not require splitting or re-categorization.

### Migration Compatible Change

Any change that still supports the Published Supported Features, but may require modification to query or ingestion by consumers of a FOCUS dataset.

Examples: 

>    - An existing categorization column is changes to split a category into two different categories

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - An existing categorization column is changed to split a category into two different categories
```

>    - An existing column that contains a numerical value is has its units changed, requireing a modification to queries using the column. The ability to use the column is preserved but a new query must be written

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - An existing column that contains a numerical value is has its units changed, requiring a modification to queries using the column. The ability to use the column is preserved but a new query must be written
```

## Versions

The FOCUS specification is released periodically. For each release a version number is assigned. Version numbers at this time are not strictly representative of compatibility. The version number is used to identify the release and to provide a reference point for changes. 

## Version Changelog
A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of focus data. The changelog for each version identifies the following:
- The version number
- Impact Classification
- Change Type Classification 
- Designation of deprecation of a feature or column
- Designation of the addition of a new feature or column
- Description of the change
- Examples of the change if needed

    

## Change Process

> TODO: A series of guidelines of how changes are proposed, reviewed, and accepted.

Reviewer: @rileyjenk Please replace this `TODO` with reviewable verbiage ASAP -- otherwise, I will pull this PR back into Draft status.

Reviewer 3: @rileyjenk any updates here?

Author: Protip...remove todos when you have done the todos.

# FOCUS Specification Change Guidelines

> The FOCUS specification is designed to be updated over time to support new use cases and to adapt to changes in the industry. Communication, specificity, and impact are considered as changes are made. While data using the FOCUS specification facilitates a wide range of analysis, the specification and the change process are scoped to the <official use cases> and to the schema described in the FOCUS specification and not to all possible analysis of the data. While example queries may be provided specific queries are not considered expressly supported content. 
> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The FOCUS specification is designed to be updated over time to support new use cases and adapt to industry changes. Communication, specificity, and impact are considered as changes are made. While data using the FOCUS specification facilitates a wide range of analysis, the specification and the change process are scoped to the <official use cases> and the schema described in the FOCUS specification and not to all possible data analyses. While example queries may be provided, specific queries are not considered expressly supported content. 

```

## Versions

The FOCUS specification is released periodically. For each release a version number is assigned. Version numbers at this time are not strictly representative of compatibility. The version number is used to identify the release and to provide a reference point for changes. 

## Version Changelog
A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of focus data. The changelog for each version identifies the following:
- The version number
- Impact Classification
- Change Type Classification 
- Designation of deprecation of a feature or column
- Designation of the addition of a new feature or column
- Description of the change

> - Examples of the change if needed

Reviewer 5: nit: This feels like too much for the changelog. Can we call this out as something that would go in supporting content?

Author: I do not agree at all...what use is the changel og if we don't put the details of the change in it?

> ## Version Changelog
> A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of focus data. The changelog for each version identifies the following:
> - The version number
> - Impact Classification
> - Change Type Classification 
> - Designation of deprecation of a feature or column
> - Designation of the addition of a new feature or column
> - Description of the change
> - Examples of the change if needed

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Version Changelog

A changelog is provided specifying helpful information to consumers of the focus specification. The changelog for each version identifies the following:

* The version number
* Impact Classification
* Change Type Classification 
* Designation of deprecation of a feature or column
* Designation of the addition of a new feature or column
* Description of the change
* Examples of the change, if needed
```

## Change Process

### Addition of a New Feature or Column

When a new feature or column is introduced to the FOCUS specification, depending on the circumstances of the change, the support of the column may be initially optional. This is to allow for the adoption of a new feature or columne by prodivers that support it, without restricting other adopters from using newer versions of the specification. 

> - The feature or item addition is proposed and specification is modified. 
> - Change log includes an indication that the new feature/column has been added.
>     - example: "Example  Column 1 has been added in version 2.0"

Reviewer 5: Standardizing on \* for bullets
```suggestion
* The feature or item addition is proposed and specification is modified. 
* Change log includes an indication that the new feature/column has been added.
    * example: "Example  Column 1 has been added in version 2.0"
```

> When a new feature or column is introduced to the FOCUS specification, depending on the circumstances of the change, the support of the column may be initially optional. This is to allow for the adoption of a new feature or columne by prodivers that support it, without restricting other adopters from using newer versions of the specification. 
> * The feature or item addition is proposed and specification is modified. 
> * Change log includes an indication that the new feature/column has been added.
>     * example: "Example  Column 1 has been added in version 2.0"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a new feature or column is introduced to the FOCUS specification, depending on the circumstances of the change, its support may be initially optional. This allows providers that support it to adopt the new feature or column without restricting other adopters from using newer versions of the specification. 

* The feature or item addition is proposed, and the specification is modified. 
* Change log indicates that the new feature/column has been added.
    * Example: "Column 1 has been added in version 2.0."
```

Some suggestions, but the second sentence of the first paragraph is unclear to me still.

Reviewer 6: As long as the column is optional, providers are not required to provide it, yet they are still allowed to say that they fully support the given version of the spec. - discussing conformance/compliance without actually using the term 😄

### Renaming a Column or Metadata 
    

> The FOCUS specification requires that renaming of a column or metadata be declared in the specification

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The FOCUS specification requires the renaming of a column or metadata to be declared in the specification.

```

* The column or metdata specification is to include a section that indicates the previous name and the version in which it was changed
* example: "Example1 column was renamed Example2 in FOCUS version 2.1"

### Deprecation and Removal of a Feature or Column
    

> The FOCUS specifcation requires that removal actions are preceded with a deprecation notice, which includes the following steps:
> * The feature or item removal is proposed, which must designate the column or metadata as deprecated.
>   * If the removal version is not yet determine, the change log MUST state "This column will be removed at a future FOCUS version"
>   * if the removal verions is already determined, the change log MUST state "This column will be removed in version 2.1"
> * Prior to removal the FOCUS specification MUST be updated to include the version that will remove the deprecated column/metadata

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The FOCUS specification requires that removal actions are preceded with a deprecation notice.

* The feature or item removal is proposed, which must designate the column or metadata as deprecated.
  * If the removal version is not yet determined, the change log MUST state, "This column will be removed at a future FOCUS version."
  * If the removal version has already been determined, the change log MUST state, "This column will be removed in version 2.1."
* Prior to removal, the FOCUS specification MUST be updated to include the version that will remove the deprecated column/metadata
```

## Change Type Classification

Changes to the FOCUS specification are classified into one of the following types:

> ### Addition:
> The addition of a new feature or column to the FOCUS specification.
> 
> ### Deprecation:
> A feature or column from the FOCUS specification is moving to deprecated status discouraging use and indicating that will the same will be removed in a future version 
> 
> ### Removal:
> The removal of a feature or column from the FOCUS specification.
> 
> ### Improvement:
> Modification to improve or refine a feature or column in the FOCUS specification, that was not considered broken. 
> 
> ### Bug Fix:
> Modification to correct an error in the FOCUS specification, that was considered broken.
> 
> ### Editorial:
> Modification to correct a spelling, grammar, or formatting error in the FOCUS specification, that does not impact the intended logic of the specification contents. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Addition:

The addition of a new feature or column to the FOCUS specification.

### Deprecation:

A feature or column from the FOCUS specification is moving to deprecated status, discouraging use and indicating that the same will be removed in a future version 

### Removal:

The removal of a feature or column from the FOCUS specification.

### Improvement:

Modification to improve or refine a feature or column in the FOCUS specification that was not considered broken. 

### Bug Fix:

Modification to correct an error in the FOCUS specification, that was considered broken.

### Editorial:

Modification to correct a spelling, grammar, or formatting error in the FOCUS specification that does not impact the intended logic of the specification contents. 
```
